Transformations doc revamp (#791)
rudderlabs/rudderstack-docs: docs/features/transformations/index.mdx

```javascript
export function transformEvent(event, metadata) {
    event.context.os = { name: "Android"};
    return event;
}
```

The `transformEvent` function overrides the event's `context.os.name` and sets it as `Android`, as seen below:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-3.png" alt="Transformation use-case" />

## Adding a transformation

To add a new transformation in the RudderStack dashboard, follow these steps:

1. Log into the [RudderStack dashboard](https://app.rudderstack.com/).
2. Go to **Enhance** > **Transformations**, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-1.png" alt="Adding a Transformation" />

3. Click **New Transformation**.
4. Add a name for your transformation and an optional description.
5. Next, add your JavaScript function in the **Transformation** window, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-2.png" alt="Adding a Transformation" />

<div class="successBlock">
You can also add other functions and call them from within <code class="inline-code">transformEvent</code>.
</div>

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> <div class="warningBlock">

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Remember to delete the existing, pre-populated code within the <code class="inline-code">transformEvent</code> function before adding or pasting your transformation code.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> </div>

Author: ```suggestion
```

<div class="infoBlock">
Read more about why your data pipeline needs to have an efficient event transformations capability in the <a href="https://rudderstack.com/blog/the-future-of-data-pipeline-tools-must-include-better-transformations-than-etl-ever-had">RudderStack blog</a>.
</div>

## How do transformations work?

At a high level, once you <Link to="#adding-a-transformation">add a transformation</Link> and connect it to a destination, RudderStack tracks and collects the events at the source (connected to the destination), applies the transformation logic to the events, and then forwards the transformed events to the destination.

<img src="../../assets/features/transformations-workflow.png" alt="Transformations workflow" />

<div class="infoBlock">
Refer to the <Link to="/features/transformations/faq/">FAQ</Link> guide for a more comprehensive list of commonly asked questions on this feature.
</div>

### Use-case

Suppose you want to set the `context.os` field for any event to `Android`, irrespective of the actual platform RudderStack tracks the event from. You can write a simple transformation to do this:

```javascript
export function transformEvent(event, metadata) {

>     event.context.os = { name: "Android"};

Reviewer: minor: maintain event & return lines with same indent

Author: Done.

## Adding a transformation

To add a new transformation in the RudderStack dashboard, follow these steps:

1. Log into your [RudderStack dashboard](https://app.rudderstack.com/).
2. Go to **Enhance** > **Transformations**, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-1.png" alt="Adding a Transformation" />

3. Click **New Transformation**.
4. Add a name for your transformation and an optional description.
5. Next, add your JavaScript function in the **Transformation** window, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-2.png" alt="Adding a Transformation" />

<div class="successBlock">
You can also add other functions and call them from within <code class="inline-code">transformEvent</code>.
</div>

<div class="infoBlock">
Refer to the <a href="https://github.com/rudderlabs/sample-user-transformers">Sample Transformations</a> GitHub repository for some useful templates that you can use to create your own transformations.
</div>

<div class="warningBlock">
Remember to delete the pre-populated <code class="inline-code">transformEvent</code> function before adding or pasting your transformation code.
</div>

> 6. To test your transformation on a sample event, click **Run Test**. RudderStack provides some sample events for you test if your transformation logic works as expected.

Reviewer: To test your transformation, paste your sample event and click **Run Test**. By default RudderStack provides some sample events for you to test if your transformation logic works as expected.

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-transformation-3.png" alt="Adding a Transformation" />

> 7. To save the transformation, click **Save**.

Author: Moved the logging section just after, to maintain the flow. that way we won't need to add an info block here.

## Connecting transformation to a destination

You can connect a transformation to a destination in two cases:

### Case 1: While setting up a new destination

RudderStack gives you the option to add a transformation while setting up a destination, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/connecting-a-transformation.png" alt="Connecting a transformation" />

### Case 2: Connecting to an existing destination

To add a transformation to an existing destination, follow these steps:

1. Go to the **Transformation** tab in your destination dashboard and click **Add a transformation**, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-transformation-existing-destination-1.png" alt="Connecting a transformation to existing destination" />

2. Then, choose the transformation to you want to connect to the destination.

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-transformation-existing-destination-2.png" alt="Connecting a transformation to existing destination" />

## `transformEvent` definition

> RudderStack applies the `transformEvent` function on each event and takes two inputs:

Author: we can just mention the name of the function (`transformEvent`) here without mentioning the arguments.

- `event`: This corresponds to the input event
- `metadata`: This is an **optional** input corresponding to the JavaScript function which you can use to access the metadata of the given event.

<div class="infoBlock">
For more information on <code class="inline-code">metadata</code>, refer to the <Link to="#accessing--the-event-metadata">Accessing metadata</Link> section below.
</div>

After the transformation is complete, `transformEvent` returns the final event to be sent to the destination.

## Using `transformBatch` instead of `transformEvent`

> In cases where you want to perform any aggregation or roll-up operation on a micro batch of events, you can use the `transformBatch` function instead of `transformEvent`, as shown:

Author: @Jayachand is there a limit on the number of events that can be included in a batch for using `transformBatch`?

```javascript
export function transformBatch(events, metadata) {
    return events;
}
```

<div class="dangerBlock">
If you are using <code class="inline-code">transformBatch</code> and want to ensure event ordering, make sure you pass on the <code class="inline-code">messageId</code> from the input event to the output event. Without the <code class="inline-code">messageId</code>, there is a strong possibility that RudderStack will <strong>not</strong> maintain the event ordering.
</div>

<div class="warningBlock">
It is highly recommended to use <code class="inline-code">transformEvent</code> as much as possible, as it ensures event ordering in any case.
</div>

## Libraries

One of the key features of RudderStack Transformations is the ability to reuse the code written for a transformation in other transformations using the **Libraries** feature.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Adding a library
```
neutral ground.. just to make it clearly accessible in the 'Contents' section. can ignore as well

Author: Makes sense, added this heading.

To add a new library, follow these steps:

1. In your RudderStack dashboard, go to **Enhance** > **Transformations** and click the **Libraries** tab, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-library-1.png" alt="Adding a library" />

2. Click **New library**.
3. Add the library **Name**, **Description** and write the function you want to reuse across different transformations.
4. You can also add multiple functions in a single library, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/adding-a-library-2.png" alt="Adding a library" />

<div class="warningBlock">

> Currently, RudderStack does not support deletion of libraries. This is to ensure that any existing transformations using the libraries do not break.

Reviewer: Deletion is supported now

</div>

5. Click **Run Test** to ensure the code included in the library has the correct syntax.

### Using libraries in transformations

> To use the libraries in your existing transformations, refer to the **Import Library Name** option in the RudderStack dashboard, as shown:

Author: Yep, good catch - highlighted the option.

<img src="../../assets/features/libraries-in-transformations.png" alt="Using libraries in transformations" />

<div class="infoBlock">
RudderStack converts the library name into <strong>camel case without spaces</strong>; this becomes your <strong>library handle</strong> which you can use across multiple transformations. For example, if your library name is <code class="inline-code">Sample Transformation Library</code>, then the library handle would be <code class="inline-code">sampleTransformationLibrary</code>.
</div>

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we should complete the usage instructions here by adding something like below:

Further, use the library in a transformation by using an import statement, like:
import { rudderEmail } from "isRudderEmail";
Here, rudderEmail is the library function and isRudderEmail is the name of the library. 

The below use-case elaborates an example in detail...

Author: Added a lead-in to maintain the flow, as you suggested.

#### Use-case

Suppose you want to import a function `rudderEmail` from the `Is Rudder Email` library to filter events that don't have the email address containing the RudderStack domain.

The `rudderEmail` function is as follows:

```javascript
export function rudderEmail(email) {
    return /@(rudderlabs|rudderstack)| \+ruddertest/.test(email);
}
```

The following code snippet demonstrates how you can implement this in a transformation:

```javascript
import { rudderEmail } from "isRudderEmail";
export function transformEvent(event) {
  const email =
    event.context && event.context.traits && event.context.traits.email;
  if (email) {
    if (!rudderEmail(email)) return;
  }
  return event;
}
```

On clicking **Run Test**, a sample event not containing the RudderStack email domain is filtered out, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/libraries-in-transformations-test.png" alt="Filtering out events using libraries in transformation" />

### Importing multiple functions from a single library

> When importing a single function or multiple functions from a library, keep the import statement to one line. Breaking the import function into multiple lines will lead to an error.

Reviewer: Need not write entirely in one line. following examples shows that

The following snippets highlight how to properly import functions from a library:

```javascript
// ---------------
import { getLoss } from "getFinanceData";

// OR

import { getLoss, getRevenue, getProfit } from "getFinanceData";
import {
  getLoss,
  getRevenue,
  getProfit
} from "getFinanceData";

// For default getPrice import
import getPrice, { getRevenue, getProfit } from "getFinanceData";

// alias imports
import getPrice as gp, { getRevenue as gr, getProfit } from "getFinanceData";
// usage: gp(event), gr(event), getProfit(ev)

import * as GFD from "getFinanceData";
// usage: GFD.getRevenue(ev), GFD.getProfit(ev)
// for default import: GFD.default(ev)
```

> The following snippets highlight the incorrect way of importing the library functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following snippets highlight the **incorrect** way of importing the library functions:
```

```javascript
// -----------------

> import * from "getFinanceData";

Reviewer: add as following:
`import * from "getFinanceData";
getPrice(ev)
`

Author: Fixed this.

// OR

import getPrice as gp from "getFinanceData";
getPrice(ev)
```

> ### How RudderStack tests library updates

Reviewer 2: Can this be moved to FAQ section? As there is no action item here, just additional info

If you update a library that is referenced in any transformation, RudderStack tests the new library code along with the transformation code against the default event payload. This ensures that the transformation does not break due to any changes in the library.

<div class="warningBlock">
RudderStack currently does not support testing libraries with custom events.
</div>

> ## Accessing the event metadata

Author: Agreed, made the change.

RudderStack injects a function `metadata(event)` into your transformations as an argument. This allows you to access the event metadata variables that help you customize your transformations.

<div class="infoBlock">
<code class="inline-code">metadata()</code> takes the event as the input and returns the metadata of the event.
</div>

The following properties, if available, are present in the metadata response:

> 

Reviewer: @sivashanmukh Should we expose sourceType & destinationType in metadata list?

Author: @Jayachand @sivashanmukh any update on this?

| Property   | Description       |
| :-------------- | :------------------------- |
| `sourceId`      | The ID of the source configured in your RudderStack dashboard. Note that it is different from the <Link to="">source write key</Link>. |
| `destinationId` | The ID of the destination configured in your RudderStack dashboard.           |
| `messageId`     | The unique ID for each event.            |

> | `sessionId`     | The ID associated with a session. This is applicable only if sessions are enabled.    |

Author: As discussed, @Jayachand to confirm about the `sessionId`.

Reviewer: sessionId is very old code. This can be removed

> Since you may not need the event metadata in every transformation, you can include it as an **optional argument** in your function signature whenever required.

Author: yep, you're right!

<div class="infoBlock">
RudderStack injects an asynchronous <code class="inline-code">fetch(url)</code> function in your transformations. It makes an API call to the given URL and returns the response in the JSON format.
</div>

You can use the `fetch` function in your transformations as follows:

```javascript
export async function transformEvent(event, metadata) {
  const res = await fetch("post_url", {
    method: "POST",  // POST, PUT, DELETE, GET, etc.
    headers: {
      "Content-Type": "application/json;charset=UTF-8",
      Authorization: "Bearer <authorization_token>"
    },
    body: JSON.stringify(event)
  });
  event.response = JSON.stringify(res);
  return event;
}
```

<div class="infoBlock">
To see the <code class="inline-code">fetch</code> function in action, refer to the <a href="https://github.com/rudderlabs/sample-user-transformers/blob/sampleTransformationV1/EnrichWithClearbit.js">Clearbit enrichment</a> sample transformation.
</div>

<div class="infoBlock">
For improved performance, it is highly recommended to use the <code class="inline-code">batch</code> API requests instead of a separate API request for each event wherever possible.
</div>

> ### Fetching response properties using `fetchV2`

Author: IMO, `fetchv2` should be highlighted in the heading for clarity, as it's slightly different to fetch which also fetches response properties.

**FetchV2** is a wrapper around the `fetch` call. It enables you to fetch the response properties more efficiently while making the external API calls.

The following properties are present in a `fetchV2` response:

| Property | Description  |
| :-------------- | :----------- |
| `status`      | Status code of fetch response, for example, `200`. |
| `url` | The URL of the Fetch API.   |
| `headers`     | The response headers   |
| `body`     | The response body in JSON or TEXT. By default, it is JSON. |

> An example of how to use the `fetchV2` function in RudderStack transformations is shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below example shows how to use the `fetchV2` function in a transformation to capture the timeout failure:
```

  
```javascript
export async function transformEvent(event) {
  try {
    const res = await fetchV2("url", { timeout: 1000});
    if (res.status == 200) {
      event.response = JSON.stringify(res.body);
    }
  } catch (err) {
    log(err.message);
  }
  return event;
}
```

> <div class="infoBlock">

Reviewer 2: can remove this if above suggestion is acceptable

Use the <code class="inline-code">try-catch</code> block to capture the cause of failure during the <code class="inline-code">fetchv2</code> call; for example, a timeout.
</div>

## Transformation and library revisions

> 

Author: Should we specify that this feature is more helpful when using the Transformations API? People using the dashboard might not be able to relate to it.

Reviewer: Yeah, remove here and add in faq section. wdyt @sivashanmukh

Author: Moved this to FAQ

  
## Debugging with logs

RudderStack enables you to access any event-related information in the form of logs while running a test on your transformation. You can do this by including the `log` function in your transformation code. 

An example of using the `log` function is shown below:

```javascript
export function transformEvent(event, metadata) {
  const meta = metadata(event);
  event.sourceId = meta.sourceId;

  log("Event Name is", event.event, ";", "Message ID is", event.messageId);
  log("Source ID is", meta.sourceId);

  return event;
}
```

On adding the above transformation and clicking **Run Test**, you can see the resulting log in the **Logs** section of the dashboard, as shown:

<img src="../../assets/features/transformation-log.png" alt="Transformation log" />

<div class="infoBlock">
You can pass a string, number, or an object as an argument to the <code class="inline-code">log</code> function.
</div>

## Limits

> You should take into account the memory and time limits when adding a new transformation. Each invocation of the transformation should not exceed the following limits:

Author: Asked @Jayachand

| Parameter    | Limit     |
| :----------- | :-------- |
| Memory limit | 8 MB      |
| Time limit   | 4 seconds |

> 

Author: @Jayachand the above limits are the same, right?

Reviewer: Memory limit -> 128 MB      
 Time limit   -> 4 seconds

Author: Updated the limits. How does the user verify if these limits are met? @Jayachand
